# New Frontiers in Sorting
## Topic: Adaptive Sorting

Adaptive sorting is an active area of research in sorting. Non-adaptive sorting methods assume that input data comes in random; that there is no sorting too any part of the data when it initially comes in. But, often we have to sort data where some parts of the data might already be sorted but not all. Adaptive sorting is an area that takes advantage of existing order within a dataset; instead of treating all data as completely unordered, adaptive sorting algorithms try to identify portions of data that are already sorted and use that informaiton to reduce the amount of work to sort the entire set.

Unsurprisingly, adaptive sorting is particularly useful when dealing with data that is already partially sorted or has some inherent structure. The main challenge in adaptive sorting is developing methods that can quickly and accurately identify the pre-sorted sequences and then efficiently merge these sequences into the fully sorted order. Approaches to solving this problem work on creating algorithms that can adapt their strategies based on the input data's characteristis (hence the name adaptive sorting) with the idea that these adaptations could provide significant improvement on speed and efficiency of a real world sorting task.

To learn more about an area of adaptive sorting I read the paper "Enhancing Adaptability of Insertion Sort
through 2-Way Expansion". 

Insertion sort is already considered an adaptive sorting algorithm since it adapts to the presence of ordering among the elements when elements are in the required order. In other words, when we call insertion sort on an already ordered list it's runtime O(n^2) goes down to n; this is the best case. If the list is almost entirely sorted, say one element is out of place, then the runtime will be a tiny bit higher than n but still much lower than n^2. So the actual (as opposed to theoretical) runtime of insertion sort is dependent on how much the list is already sorted, because the very design of insertion sort makes it adaptable. But currently, insertion sort can't take advantage of a reverse sorting. In fact, with the normal insertion sort design, sorting a list that is sorted in reverse order will result in the worst possible runtime. But, we as humans know that if we simply reversed the order of the list (which we can do much faster than insertion sorting it) we would have the best case.

This paper proposes a way to modify insertion sort to increase its adaptability for reverse order sorted lists (or lists with some segments sorted in reverse order). The paper calls this enhanced version of insertion sort Adaptive Insertion Sort, or AIS. AIS uses a 2-way expansion method to take advantage of both forward and reverse pre-sorting. This approach reduces the number of shift operations (moving elements of an array one position to the right to create space for inserting new elements) and leverages binary search to decrease the number of comparions needed to find the insertion point in the sorted part of the array. Key contributions incldue a detailied comparsion and shift operation analysis that demonstrate AIS's efficiency in best- and worst- case scenarios. Overall, the results show that AIS shows signficiant premoance improvements over traditional insertion sort as it is adaptive to two pre-sorted scenarios (backwards and forwards pre-sort) while traditional insertion sort is only adaptable to one scenario (forwards pre-sort). One major downside of AIS is the added space complexity; while traditional insertion sort requires a space complexity of 1, AIS's space complexity is directly proportional to the size of the list being sorted.